now imagine this is a stem cell stem
cells are unique because they have the
ability to generate new cells of almost
any kind they all start off as
unspecialized cells but given the right
chemical and genetic signals the stem
cells can divide to form slightly more
specialized cells of different size
shape and function and after a few more
cycles of division these can give rise
to highly specialized cells like heart
muscle cells for example that help your
heart pump the blood around your body
given a different set of signals this
same unspecialized stem cell can go down
an alternative pathway and give rise to
a different type of specialized cell
like a neuron that transmits electrical
signals in the brain compared with stem
cells from embryos adult stem cells give
rise to a smaller number of cell types
usually those of the organ or tissue in
which they're found now researchers have
found adult stem cells in more tissues
than previously thought
bone marrow skin brain liver eyes and
this has led to research into using the
patient's own adult stem cells to repair
damaged organs
finger laughs like your head
and that's exactly the focus of the
trial Michael Taylor is taking part in
led by Professor Anthony Mather at the
London Chest Hospital the trial is
vitally important because heart disease
is still on the rise cardiovascular
disease is the number one killer in the
UK with nearly 3 million people
suffering their heart conditions in the
UK and about 800,000 people suffering
with this condition of heart failure
he's got a condition which makes the
heart very weak and baggy and it doesn't
work very well as a pump and what we're
trying to do is see whether his own stem
cells can actually repair that heart and
make it pump effectively again so if
you're looking to repair a heart tissue
do you need to use heart stem cells
ideally yes the problem is that there
are very few of those cells in the heart
and we've only only recently discovered
that they're there and the fuze heart
stem cells to the present clearly aren't
capable of repairing it and that's
really where we step in with our trials
is by using bone marrows as a source of
stem cells we try and enhance the stem
cells in the heart and their ability to
repair the damage that's been caused
this trial tackles heart disease on two
fronts
Michael's bone marrow has already been
stimulated to release enormous numbers
of stem cells into his blood and now
more are to be harvested directly from
the bone marrow in his hip okay it
wasn't good
as this is still a trial only some
patients will have these stem cells
reinjected although michael will get an
injection directly into his heart
neither he nor professor Mather know if
it will contain his stem cells or a
placebo we're about to put neither stem
cells or placebo into his coronary
arteries
we won't know which until the end of the
study when we're treated all of our
patients this uncertainty helps the
researchers to rule out the placebo
effect from any positive results they
achieve professor Mather feeds a tube
through Michael's blood vessels right to
the site of the disease in his heart
incredibly Michael remains fully awake
throughout the entire procedure
it can't save anything
so that's until the first are we done
now second one then one more in the move
will finished
you